Let's recap some of the big things that we've
learned in this lecture. In the previous lecture
we discussed the forward kinematic function;
that's the function K. Its argument is Q and
that's the vector of joint angles, its vector
of length N, where N is the number of joints
that the robot has. The result of the forward
kinematic function is the pose of the robots
end effector, which I call here ksiN. Forward
kinematics takes the joint angles and gives
us the robot end effector pose.
In this lecture we've discussed the inverse
kinematic function that's shown here as K
to the minus one. It operates on the robot
end effector pose and tells us the joint angles
required to achieve that pose. The inverse
is not unique. For a particular robot end
effector pose, there can be multiple sets
of joint angles which will achieve that particular
pose, for our little two link robot, there
are two possible configurations shown here.
For our six link Puma robot, which operates
in three dimensional space, there are in fact
six possible solutions.
There are several approaches to solving the
inverse kinematic problem for a particular
robot. For a simple robot like the two link
example, we use a geometric solution and that
requires some intuition and some insight,
it involves defining particular triangles,
introducing new angles and applying a number
of simple trigonometric relationships in order
to solve for the joint angles we're interested
in, in this case Q1 and Q2 as a function of
the end effector pose XY and the robot's constant
link lengths A1 and A2. We right down the
forward kinematic equations, which here give
us the end effector pose X and Y in terms
of the joint angles and then with a large
amount of manipulation and again with some
insight and intuition, we can write down equations
which give us the robot joint angles.
The steps involved in the analytic solution
for robot inverse kinematics involves the
following steps; firstly we need a model of
the robot, we need to know the position and
orientation of the joints with respect to
the links. We need to know the lengths of
the links and so on. From that we extract
a number of equations and we attempt to solve
for the unknown joint variables. As I said
before, it requires some human insight, although
it can be automated using computer algebra
techniques for particular robots or particular
classes of robots.
The great advantages of the analytic solution
is it explicitly shows you the multiple configurations
of the robot and lets you choose the joint
angles that will give you the configuration
that you want. For the Puma 560 robot it allows
you to explicitly choose a left handed configuration
or a right handed configuration or the elbow
up or the elbow down. Another advantage is
that the solutions are very compact and fast
to execute. You can take the resulting equations
and you can code them up in your favorite
programming language and they will execute
very, very quickly. However the analytic approach
is increasingly difficult as the number of
joints increases and takes quite a lot of
work to do it for a six link robot. Fortunately
a lot of smart people have looked at this
problem over many, many decades and solutions
for almost all robots have been derived and
are published somewhere in the literature.
An alternative to the analytic solution is
the numerical solution and that's applicable
when the analytic solution doesn't exist or
the analytic solution is just too hard to
figure out. It relies on the fact that we
can always determine the forward kinematics
of the robot, that’s relatively straightforward
to do and we talked about that in the previous
lecture.
We know the pose that we want the robot end
effector to achieve which is called ksi*,
but all we need to do is adjust the joint
angles Q until ksi matches ksi* and we can
pose this mathematically as an optimization
problem written very formally here. And we
showed how we can use MATLAB and the robotics
toolbox to determine the numerical solution
for a two link robot and for a six link robot.
There are some disadvantages with the numerical
solution. You need to be careful about choosing
the initial set of joint angles that you use
for your optimizer. You can't guarantee that
the optimizer will find the particular robot
configuration that you're interested in. If
you wanted a left handed configuration, you
can't guarantee the optimizer will find that
particular configuration, it depends on your
choice of initial joint angles. It can also
be computationally expensive. It's an iterative
algorithm and the number of iterations depends
on how good your initial set of joint angles
is and that computational expense maybe inappropriate
in a hard, real time system where you need
to compute inverse kinematics within a small
and finite amount of time. We talked about
how to create smooth paths for the robot end
effector moving from one pose to another and
we introduced two approaches to doing this.
The first is what's called a "Joint Interpolated
Path." We take the initial pose and final
pose and we use inverse kinematics to determine
the initial and final sets of joint angles,
then we smoothly interpolate between those
two sets of joint angles and that's relatively
straightforward to do.
The disadvantage of this is we can't guarantee
that the robot will follow a straight line
path in three dimensional space. We also can't
guarantee that the end effector orientation
will be our desired value at every point along
that path; however joint interpolated paths
are relatively cheap to compute because we're
only interpolating joint angle vectors at
ever time step. An alternative is to compute
a Cartesian interpolated path and what we
do here is for every point along the trajectory
we interpolate between the initial and final
end effector pose. For each interpolated pose
we then compute the inverse kinematics to
find the joint angles that are appropriate
at that particular time step.
The advantage of this technique is that it
allows for straight line paths in three dimensional
space. It also ensures that the end effector
has got the desired orientation at every point
along the trajectory.
The disadvantage is that computationally it's
much more expensive. We need to interpolate
poses and that involves interpolating the
translational component and the rotational
component and that might in fact involve converting
from rotation matrix to a quaternion interpolating
the quaternion and then transforming that
back to a rotation matrix, then we have to
perform the inverse kinematics at every single
time step. So much more computation involved,
upside is that we can guarantee straight line
paths in three dimensional space.